build-lists: true

# Music Notation in <br /> Adobe Illustrator
## Dartmouth College
### 12-13 November, 2016

---

# Thanks!

---

# Background

---

## ...

---

## ...

---

## ...

---

# Session 1
## Soft Landing
### A music-centric introduction to Adobe Illustrator

---

# Objectives

Become fluent in the day-to-day operations in Illustrator:

- Create paths, giving them strokes and fills
- Group shapes to maintain practical and semantic links therewithin
- Store them as symbols to maximize re-usability
- Gain appreciation for this beautiful program
- Have fun, build obsession

---

# The `Path` tool
## [`P`] for `P`ath

^ 
- Show uses for `Path` tool
- Demonstrate building up a `Path` by clicking a lot
- Stoke / Fill ?

---

# Solo Activity:
- Make a rectangle with the `Path` tool.
- Make a perfect square with the `Path` tool.

---

## Success?
## What hurt?

---

# The `Rectangle` tool 
## [`M`] for `M`ectangle

^
- Demonstrate the creation of a rectangle, square
- Preview scaling
- Stroke / Fill ?

---

# Questions:
- What do the `⇧` (`shift`), and/or `⌥` (`option`) keys do when creating a rectangle?
- What do they do when scaling a rectangle?

---

# What about curves?

^
- So far, we have only made straight lines
- Demonstrate how to create Bézier curves
- For more info, check out Pomax inro to Bézier curves

---

# Really quick:

- Experiment with curves
- What happens when you have a `non-nil` fill color?

---

# How do we control this madness!?

---

# Guides

^
- Demonstrate conversion of a square `Path` into a `Guide`.
- `control-click` -> `Make Guides`

- You can convert any path into a guide
- You can lock/unlock them, and show/hide them

---

# Solo Activity:

- Make an ellipse using only the `Path` tool.
- Make a perfect circle using only the `Path` tool.
- Hint: Make guides.

---

## Success?
## What hurt?

---

# The `Ellipse` tool
## [`L`] for `L`-ipse

---

# The `Selection` tool
## [`V`] for `V`-election

---

# The `Direct Selection` tool
## [`A`] for ... ?

---

# The `Cut` tool
## [`C`] for `C`ut

---

# Pair Activity:
## Close the door (**_fff_**)

^ 
Create an icon for closing a door with the following components:
- Door
- Threshold
- Dashed path with arrowhead

---

- What can be improved?

---

# QUICK BREAK 1: Questions?

---

# Solo Activity:
- Make 5 equidistantly-spaced, horizontal, parallel lines
- Decide the best proportion between `stroke-width` and separation

---

## Success?
## What hurt?

---

# `⌘-D`
## [`D`]o it again

^
- Demonstrate that this works for a variety of different transformations

---

# Really Quick:
- Recreate this 5-line staff using `Transform Again` (`⌘-D`)

---

# Question:

- What happens when you try to move the lines?

---

# `⌘-G`
## [`G`]roup

---

# Solo Activity:
- Create a System Divider (see example)

^
Show example (two parallelograms)

---

## Success?
## What hurt?

---

# Question:

- What do you get when you `control-click` on a path?

---

# Transform

- Move
- Rotate
- Reflect
- Scale
- Shear

---

# Really quick:

- Now make the System Divider using `Shear`.

---

# QUICK BREAK 2: Questions?

--- 

# Solo activity
- Create a repeating waveform: triangle wave
- Just stroke it, no fill, for now

---

## Success?
## What hurt?

---

# `⇧-J`
## [`J`]oin Paths

### When using the [`P`]ath tool

---

# Pair Activity
- Create a more complex waveform
	- Sine wave
	- Sawtooth wave

- Too easy?
	- Real-life square wave

---

# Team Activity
- Make the coolest waveform
- Fill it with a different color than the stroke
- Choose a good `stroke-width`
- Can you move it around? Does it break?

---

# The `Text` tool
## [`T`] for `T`ext

^
Demonstrate: `Type` -> `Create Outline` or `⇧-⌘-O`

---

# Create musical symbols from fonts

^
- `shift-7`: treble clef
- `shift-/`: bass clef

---

Create symbols

---

# Pair activity
- Find two or three other music notation symbols that you like:
	- Clefs, noteheads, rests, etc.
- Turn them into `Paths` (`Type` `->` `Create Outline`)
- Turn them into symbols
- Set the best anchor point for their uses
- Place them on the staff, size them appropriately

---

# Questions?

---

# Session 2
## Best of both worlds,<br /> and the consequences
### Building hybrid scores

---

# Objectives

Find the best ways to use (Finale | Sibelius) with Illustrator:

- Rekindle love for the traditional music notation software
- Build thoughtful protocols for transferring content between programs 
- Develop reusable templates for useful things
- Import symbols built by someone else
- Begin fantasizing about never using traditional music notation software ever again

---

# Two branches:
- (Finale | Sibelius) as primary application
- Illustrator as primary application

---

## (Finale | Sibelius)<br /> as primary application

---

## What can you use Illustrator for when most of the music is best-representable with traditional notation software?

- Tablature notations
- Stage layout
- Choreographic directions
- Extended instrumental technique explanation
- Technical set-up diagram
- Circuit diagrams

---

---

## Illustrator<br /> as primary application
### How can you use traditional music notation software when most of the music is best-representable with graphics software?

---

# Structured Time

---

# Session 3
## Live free or die
### Building pure-Illustrator scores

---

# Objectives

Bypass the dependency on traditional music notation software:

- Find the structures that best model the music that you do
- Deal with time

---

# QUICK BREAK 1: Questions?

---

# QUICK BREAK 2: Questions?

---

# Session 4
## Feeling the power
### A gentle introduction to scripting into Illustrator

---

# Objectives

Learn to automate the generation of graphics in Illustrator:

- Use a script that someone else wrote
- Discover that you _can_ script into Illustrator
- Generate the structural elements of score with a single button-press
- Think about time, and how that plays out graphically

---

# Scripts
- Download this: __http://aiscripts.com/open-multipage-pdf/__
- Double click it, it should open `ExtendScript Toolkit`.
- Select a `PDF` you have created with (Finale | Sibelius)
- Select the range of pages

---

# Starting from scratch

---

# Hello, world!

---

- Document
- ...
- ...
- ...

---

Hello, world!
Hello, world!
Hello, world!
Hello, world!
Hello, world!
Hello, world!
Hello, world!
Hello, world!
Hello, world!
Hello, world!
Hello, world!
Hello, world!
Hello, world!
Hello, world!
Hello, world!
Hello, world!
Hello, world!
Hello, world!
Hello, world!
Hello, world!

---

# Create a `Path`.

^
- End points
- Stroke?

---

# Create a `Rectangle`.

^
- Size
- Position
- Fill?

--- 

# QUICK BREAK 1: Questions?

---

# `noise~`-represented

^
Make a bar graph of randomly generated numbers

---

# Bar graph

---

# QUICK BREAK 2: Questions?